# Google Lied About Click Data — Here's What Actually Drives Rankings in 2026

**Expert:** Cyrus Shepard

**Source:** https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rnLbyvn3L2s

---

[music] >> Hey everyone, welcome to another episode of the Near Memo. You might recognize that this is not Greg Sterling speaking. This is David Mim, one of the other co-founders of Near Media and I am a relatively infrequent guest on the podcast these days, so I'm not sure what episode number this is. 251. 251, thank you, Mike. So or uh we're one past the nation's uh birth birth years, apparently. Um I don't know what that says for the state of the podcast, but anyway, uh we are here with a very special guest today, Cyrus Shepard of Zippy, a fellow Oregonian with myself and we're really excited to have Cyrus on today to talk about a topic near and dear to to our hearts at Near Media as a company that does a lot of user testing of Google. Um we are here to talk about click data, user click patterns, how Google uses that data and the impact that AI overviews might have on this whole ecosystem. So Cyrus, welcome to the show and as we get started, maybe you can just kind of summarize for our listeners and our our watchers kind of what the main thrust of your article that you just published was. Yeah, thank you, David. I'm happy to be back on the 251st episode. I feel like this is the SEO equivalent of the old radio show Car Talk. Do you remember that? Yeah, where you can just veterans talking about SEO. Always happy to be here. So the thrust of the article is If we last as long as Click and Clack, I will that that will be a real feather in Near Media's cap, so. >> Although hopefully I don't go out with dementia. As >> No, no, no. As say we all. So to get into it, the thrust of the article and I'll go into a little bit of history here. I don't want to get too long-winded was that for years people in the space in the SEO space highly suspected that Google was using user click data in its in its ranking algorithms. They always sort of denied it, but uh there were experiments and uh patents, the great uh late Bill Slawski would analyze patents where Google would, you know, analyze click data and Google would always say, "Well, just because we patented something doesn't mean we're necessarily using it. Don't believe everything you you read." And then the Google antitrust trial, which happened I I think 2 years ago now, evidence started pouring out that wow, not only are they using click data, it is one of their major ranking signals. It is one of the top things that they're using to uh help analyze results. The other the other things being content and links, anchors, as they say. >> So you're telling us that Google was gaslighting us, Cyrus? Gaslighting is a very good word and apparently apparently, you know, in the court documents it it was it was they discussed this. They're like, "We don't talk about it. We have a policy. You may not you may want to talk about clicks, but we do not talk about it. You may disagree with that policy, but we do not talk about it." So gaslighting, some people call it lying, but these Google reps were in a very awkward position. So they they couldn't tell us the truth because it was company policy. Uh and then so then we had a third thing, which was the Google API leak, in which this data warehouse leak, someone leaked it online where we could see the API endpoints of, you know, how what Google's using in its algorithm. It didn't tell us how they were using this data. So then we have the Google API leak, which didn't tell us how Google was using, you know, these endpoints, but we could see what data they were collecting. And interestingly the endpoints they were collecting matched perfectly what they talked about in court and also the Google patents. So we have this we have this record of how Google might be using clicks, confirmation that they're using clicks and data endpoints showing us exactly what they're collecting. So I wanted to write a post that ties all these pieces together to show how Google is likely tracking and using click behavior, watching what people click on, so that we can understand it better and just cement it in our minds because there's so much data out there, there's so much noise. I just wanted to create, you know, bring these pieces together so people could understand them. That's great. That makes sense. Yeah, absolutely. And I think one of the things that was really compelling about your post in particular, for me anyway, as a sort of zero-click reader, if you will, the graphics that you showed around sort of, you know, bad click, good click, last long click or whatever the exact sort of attribute is called, the graphics are really impressive and just kind of showing the difference in kind of what those three things are. You know, can you take us through a little bit more detail about what those three click types are that you identified in the API documentation and then how those sort of play into the, you know, positive or negative signals that your website is sending to the algorithm. Yeah, absolutely. So the big idea is, which came out in the court case, is Google with all its amazing technology can only guess at what good content is. They have a pretty good idea, but they're not really sure. So they were they're relying on us to tell them. So when you see, you know, the 10 blue links or the the top search results, that that represents Google's best guess as to what they think, you know, should be ranking. And then they relentlessly watch what users are clicking on to tell them, "Is this a good result? Is this a bad result?" And so those those are clicks. And then they try to judge, "Are these good clicks or bad clicks?" And it was interesting to me because reading through all the Google patents, time and time again, the number one metric they're looking at is dwell time, time on site, you can call it different things, how long a user is staying on a certain result. And they can take that data and they can divide it they can slice it by, you know, the query, you know, are you searching for something simple like, "How tall is Mount Everest?" You're not going to spend a lot of time on that page. But if you're looking for, you know, stock analysis, you may be spending much more time on that page. They can slice that data by language, location and weigh all those things against each other and start to understand what users are saying is the best result. And then you have something, probably the most important endpoint, which Google calls last longest click and that is a long click the user spent significant time interacting with the result and they didn't go back to the search result. Meaning their search journey was satisfied. Uh so maybe they search for something else, maybe they go on and, you know, spend some time on X or Facebook, but they don't go back to the search result and click on something else. Those last longest clicks appear to be the most important signal that you can send to Google and those are the three main ones they're looking for, clicks, long clicks and last longest clicks. So in some sense that you might say that a a last longest click is Google's sort of stand-in for a conversion on whatever the query was, right? So not necessarily that they ended up buying something, but that their their query was satisfied by that last longest click. >> Their their query was satisfied. I think about the way I think about it is task completion. I've completed whatever I set out to do and we might when we're searching Google people like us, power users, we might have a thousand tasks a day or a hundred tasks a day that we're just trying to to get through before we start new results and those are very important apparently to Google. Yeah. So I want to take take us back to local briefly since that's kind of the main sort of focus of of Near Media and then we'll kind of go back to some of the other points that you made in the article, which I think have impact not just on businesses who are trying to rank for local queries, but all businesses. So but as it relates to local, I mean I I I think the and sort of the reason I was curious to get your take on a sort of query satisfaction is we've hypothesized for a long time in local that, you know, the number of actions that users take on Google Business Profiles uh you know, in addition to the engagement that those profiles get, right? Which you can take that's sort of a stand-in for the amount of time that people spend on a website, amount of times people spend on a Google Business Profile scrolling photos, reading reviews, reading services, that that sort of thing. But that's probably a pretty pretty much a sort of one-to-one comparison, but the the thing for that Google has with GBPs, especially on phones, is they can also track actions, right? They can track clicks to call, which Google reports on in GBP data, clicks for driving directions and, you know, potentially for Android users, I suppose, even if they don't click to call, they can probably track the number that they're calling to see what kind of which uh which business they're they're checking in on. So I think to us in in local anyway, you know, it it absolutely makes sense that Google's been doing this sort of across the rest of the web and that they're they're having to find a sort of proxy for that that conversion action uh that they that they have sort of in-house data on when it comes to to GBPs. Uh just to kind of an aside there. I don't know if you have any thoughts on kind of that as a as a parallel. Absolutely. And just a caveat that, you know, I I'm not you guys are know so much more about local, but the those Google Business Profiles are interesting. If you think about what I just talked about task completion and I was thinking about this before we started talking today about a local example and I was thinking like if I had a dentist office and think about that user journey. Someone someone refers you to a dentist, you Google them, you go to their website or their their Google Business Profile and uh they're looking at you and like, "Well, what's the first question they're going to have?" They're going to like wonder what your reviews are. And if you don't if they have to leave your website and go to Yelp to look at those reviews, well, that doesn't really send a good signal that your website is helping them complete their task. If those if those reviews are on your Google Business Profile, that can help or maybe you embed those reviews on your website to you have some of those signals. Doesn't doesn't matter. Uh but then what's the next step they're they're going to want to do? They're going to want to book an appointment, hopefully. And this is this is part of their journey. And your call to action is, you know, "Hey, call us at this phone number." But information sheet, a lot of places can have your phone number. Or maybe they can't find it on your website or I don't know. But what if you have a booking link, you know, and you you can book and complete that action. And maybe that booking link's on your Google Business Profile as well. But completing that user journey and Google's watching that journey and where it takes place. And you can decide if you want it on your website, on your Google Business Profile, but you don't want anybody else to own it. So all of those actions, you want to make sure you're consolidated and own all of those places. AJ Kohn talks about user doing your reservations for you on there. >> do not. AJ Kohn, SEO consultant that we all know in the Bay Area, he's a big advocate of just if other people have the data and you can collect it in one place, do that so they don't have to search somewhere else because you want to own that experience and own the task completion journey. So, that's I think that's that's how it ties in. Absolutely. And I think in particular one of my not that you would you would just copy whole class, but I think featuring snippets of reviews from Yelp reviews that have been filtered is a great double win, right? It's content that nobody else is going to see cuz Yelp sort of hides it as best they can. And it's keeping people on the site, you know, engaging with review content like you said, which they're going to have to go otherwise they're going to have to go to to third-party sites to find. And the other thing is and I'll we'll do a segue here into AI overviews, which I know is also another piece of the equation that you've been thinking about and analyzing the last month or so. The AI overview then might pick up some of these snippets from reviews when it comes to presenting answers about your business. So, that's I think one of the things >> make that transition though. All right, conversions is one thing, but brand search is another thing and in local brand search goes back to 2009 when Google would give you a places sticker for your door if you had a lot of brand searches, right? So, the history of brand searches goes way back in local, but clearly the rest of the web has finally recognized the value of these. And as you point out, it's one of the metrics that Google appears to be using is the quantity of brand searches, right? Yeah, absolutely. You know, Google says with the helpful content update that came out and is now part of the core systems, they want to see two things from any website on the web. You either have to have an existing audience, which we can translate as brand, or you need to have a pretty strong, you know, intended audience, a business model set up that they can recognize that you're trying to draw things in. But, whenever we run a correlation study between brand search and rankings, strong brands, people searching for you specifically, always always correlate with higher rankings. So, very real-world business signals. Yeah, and I remember don't remember the year, but let's say MozCon 2013, something like this, Rand gave a keynote at the beginning of the keynote he asked people to all in the audience, thousand people in Seattle, all do the same search and all click on the same business in the I think it was a 10-pack at the time or a seven-pack. It was a lot more than three. And then we sort of he gave his talk and then at the end he we all did the same search, and that business had shot up to number one in the rankings. So, the combination of hot brand searches, even in the course of an hour, right? Hot brand searches and clicks on the same business like really led to a dramatic increase in that business's rankings and performance. And I think that that was, you know, for all of the all of the gag orders that Google introduced on, you know, all of its public representatives around the importance of click data like Rand proved it well before any of these DOJ documents or API leaks came out. You know, this was a decade plus ago. Yeah, I remember that. I remember it was like a small Ethiopian restaurant or something. I I had shot up to the top of the rankings. What And you raise a really important point, David, that one of the things that came out in the antitrust trial is Google isn't just looking at search results. You know, you guys were talking about real-world signals, people using directions with their phone, they have that. But, Google Google can collect any data from Chrome browsers. And that apparently that that's a signal of popularity. So, even if you aren't driving people through search, if you're driving them through other channels, getting them to search through a TV commercial or radio advertisement or billboard, they can measure that data and see, "Oh, people are going to this website. There must be some demand there. It's a popular website even if they aren't ranking, we should give them some consideration." Yeah. 100%. I will circle back to brand, Mike. There was a method to my madness, but All right. All right. I just didn't want to I I felt it was so fundamental as a aspect along with conversions that Right. Sorry for interrupting. I'll I'll zip it from here on All right. No, no, go ahead. Keep talking. Keep talking. Keep talking. >> [laughter] >> All right. So, let's get back to AI overviews for just a second, Cyrus. So, so obviously AI overviews, there's been a lot of doom and gloom, to put it mildly, in the sort of web publisher community about the impact of AI overviews on the amount of traffic that they're receiving, the number of queries that it's present for, etc. So, you also wrote a it felt like a companion piece. I don't know if you conceived of it that way, but a companion piece to your click data post in terms of the impact that AI overviews might have on this click ecosystem. And I don't know if you can kind of summarize your thoughts as they relate to AI overviews, but obviously in a world where there's fewer clicks, Google's going to have fewer sort of direct signals to look at for last longest click or whatever when it comes to ranking publishers. So, kind of expand on that and and take us through kind of your logic behind that piece. Yeah, well, there's no doubt that AI overviews are decreasing traffic to a lot of publishers, especially publishers that profit on information. Most of the cost of producing mediocre information is now zero for for anybody. So, that's that's definitely a thing. And AI overviews also seem to highly benefit one business, which is Google, because people are staying on Google longer. A lot of the links in the AI overviews simply go back to Google searches. So, we don't a lot of people don't have to leave the Google interface. It's interesting about the the click data training that you said. So, when Google developed AI overviews, apparently the story is within the engineering circles, they couldn't use regular search results because it took too long to generate those for these long-tail queries. So, they developed new algorithms called fast search and fast rank and BERT that use far less data. And they're using complex algorithms that use like 10 times less data. And I think they're using AI and machine learning to guesstimate click data. So, they they have they have 20 years of data to build on. So, I think they can pretty accurately look at a website and guesstimate using their algorithms how people will click. And then they just need a little they need they need far less actual clicks to verify that. So, and I think that's the future. I used to work We've talked about this before. I used to work as a Google quality rater, manually evaluating websites. I think they're using a lot of AI and machine learning to do that job now. Taking humans out of the loop to a certain extent. And they might do it better than I did. To be honest, I was I was kind of lazy at it. But, You were one of the you were one of the first people in the world to lose their job due to AI. >> [laughter] >> All the hype all the hype now, this was three years old, right? When was When did they fire all the quality raters? Yeah, exactly. >> Google. But, while we're on the subject of AI, you know, I we talked about brand and reputation and all that stuff. Right now, it's still kind of the wild wild west when Google when people Google your brand, there's what other people say about you and what you say about yourself. And right now, there is there's such an opportunity for you to say great things about yourself if you know what questions people are asking. I I see so many businesses own those AI overviews with their own citations. And Google doesn't seem to care. And I think it it's a great opportunity to Google yourself and see what the AI overviews say and just start owning creating content around that and owning that serp because what you say about yourself is absolutely Google's Google's starving for content for those AI overviews. If you provide it, they'll they'll probably use it. Right. I think I just want to highlight one of the thing, you know, while we're on the subject of sort of AI and brand. And here I'm going to get back to my brand soapbox, Mike. Um, so one of the things that we see in our user research in personal injury law, and we presented this data September, I think, of last year at the lunch hour legal marketing summit in in Vegas, and we've we've since done a follow-up study with a very similar pattern. But, in in PI law, and I I think that this is true basically in any local business category, we don't necessarily see AI overviews reducing clicks to local business websites. What we see is consumers using them to orient themselves in the category cuz they're not domain experts in law. You know, if you get an AI overview for a furnace repair query or something like that, you're not going to go and try to do that yourself, probably. But, they're sort of using them to kind of Am I looking for the right type of professional? What are some of the What are some of the criteria I should be using to evaluate these professionals? That sort of thing. And they're not they're not stopping the journey. That doesn't satisfy their journey to your earlier point, right? Their earlier Their journey is they need someone to solve this problem for them because they are not a professional themselves. And so, we actually see AI overviews driving more searches that do lead to clicks to local business websites. But, a lot of times, this is where the brand thing comes in, consumers will pay attention to the the firms that are in law are getting recommended in the AI overview. Oh, here's six or eight firms in the, you know, greater Phoenix area that all have good reviews and blah blah blah. And then they'll do follow-up brand searches for each of those. And so, this is one of our and and one of the things that's frustrating for a lot of SEOs is it's very hard to track at scale kind of how you're doing in AI overviews cuz you never know when they're going to show up. The queries are always different, etc. etc. But, I think one of the proxies that we've recommended law firms look at is your volume of brand searches over time because if you see that going up, chances are good that you're getting cited in a brand in a sorry, in an AI overview and consumers are looking then for your brand as a follow-up to that exercise. And if your brand searches are going down, you probably should be concerned that you're not showing up in AI overviews the way your competition may be. So, that's kind of where I think that the the sort of even if AI overviews are in fact reducing clicks and reducing the amount of click data in the local business world to small business websites, I think Google is still then backfilling that click data with with brand searches which was I think Mike's earlier point. So. Yeah, I don't know if you have any thoughts on that. Yeah. No, I think it's a great I think that's great advice brand branded search volume and Google did us a huge favor couple months ago by adding the branded query filter in Google search console and I I had to recreate those for years and a lot of people didn't do them but now you can just do it with a click of a button. I I always say brand search is one of the mandatory things that all SEOs and marketing teams should be looking at because it's it's a it's a goal of strength. It's interesting because I've had I've had legal clients and the old model used to be you know you'd create the content you wanted to rank for and try to get as much traffic and then you'd you'd funnel them and I would work with lawyers who put big pop-ups and conversion banners you know Those still exist. That is too aggressive. We got to tone this down. We got to tone this down but now I've started kind of change my thinking on this because the information can live in the AI overviews but I want to really capture that secondary intent which is ultimately get the get the conversion the higher the the call. So now I'm thinking let's help with that task completion. What are the next steps after that? I want to know I want to understand pricing. I want to understand reviews. I want to understand how do I book? When will you call me back? All those things and I think emphasizing that content a little bit more on the website that you own is maybe a little bit more important now and we can push those things to help complete those tasks. How many years have you been in business? All that. Great photography. Who am I going to be working with? You know that sort of those sorts of questions. Yeah, absolutely. But also you know I think it I think it's still worth creating that you know top of funnel content because you're still going to get cited. People are going to have questions. But it's But now you can be realistic. Why bother with all that content? You're the best lawyer in Phoenix and here are the other nine guys. And they're and they're and they're really bad. They're really >> they're just not number one. That's all. That's right. They're really terrible. So in our final few minutes here Cyrus I I you also had some I thought very strong tactical recommendations which we also provide in our personal injury law research which we're not going to reveal here on the call but you provided sort of structurally similar recommendations shall we say in terms of earning the click, right? So for the percentage of whatever percentage of traffic the AI overviews are not eating how can you make your organic results earn more clicks and earn more sort of last longest clicks once they're there? So I don't know if you can walk people through kind of some of your thinking in terms of how you recommended people structure their title tags, their descriptions, their their snippets, everything. Yeah, absolutely. So the thing I want to avoid people doing is people start with title tag optimization and they create this really clickable title tag, you know, best lawyer in Phoenix rated blah blah and then the users click through and they're like this this really isn't what I'm looking for and they click back. And you so you got the click but you just created a bad click. So you shot yourself in the foot and you can see this in analytics when you do title tag testing that you you roll out a bunch of new titles and your click-through rate goes up and then but within a couple weeks your traffic is lower because people you're fooling people. So you're making a promise with your title and the result has to deliver that promise. So you want an attractive serp. You want your you know review stars if you have them. You want an attractive icon. I think people sleep on their icons all the time. High contrast side icons so you stand out and you want a title that shows two things. Exactly what people are searching for the keywords that they used. Then you want to show the promise. How are you going to deliver that? What are you giving them? What is the search intent? So Phoenix DUI lawyer get your questions answered now or we'll we'll we'll help you out there's there's some there's some secondary intent that you're going to help them with. So that's that's the that's earning the click. Getting the click you want to engage people and the simplest way to think about this is is what else is on the page that I can engage people with. So you want to answer the question quickly. If they're searching for something answer the question at the top of the page. Don't bury it in the bottom and then for those people who stick around draw them into your content. And the simplest way to think about this give them things to click on that are interesting. Have an interesting navigation that answers the question. Use the content below the answer to answer related questions. You're you're drawing them in and I I like testing I think navigations are secret weapons because a lot of people look at navigations. Testing different navigation links and the language can often have a significant impact on time on site and engagement because you're you're drawing people in. So we're trying to get people to one of my favorite reports and I'm not a huge fan of J4 but I'm starting to like it even now years later is when Google launched J4 one of their major reports was engagement and you can filter for organic traffic and I just see how long people are spending on site how many engaged sessions per user and it's it's honestly become my favorite report because there seems to be a correlation between increasing engagement and downstream rankings because of I think because of these click signals that we're talking about. And then finally it's it's ending the journey satisfying the user intent. And this is a tough one. We can't measure this. We have proxies. We can look at conversions. We can look at brand search to see if people are satisfied but it is really hard to measure. It often involves a lot of competitive analysis. Is anybody else offering am I the am I actually the best for this query? You got to put yourself in the user's shoes and go back to the serp and see if someone else might be answering that question better than you and providing a better experience and it it's often tough love when I talk to clients you know showing them different screenshots like I I'd rather shop here than than your site because they provide a lot and you know we we have to do better. So earning every part of that journey and just helping people complete their task and measuring it and looking at the things that matter that's what we do that's what we're going to do. So in law one of the things we see a lot of is this software that as soon as the user gets to the site it asks you know do you have a you need a lawyer and brings a pop-up and then gee let me show you a video of the lawyer and brings another pop-up and it just keeps on going right? It's like and we just see that all the time trying to push this issue of last longest click by somehow brute strength rather than answering the questions that are either explicit or implicit in the user's journey, right? It's it's okay if people come to your site and and leave if they got what they were looking for in that in that moment. They just might need a quick question answered. So there's there is that push and pull. You have to satisfy that user intent within the first few seconds of them landing on your page. If you have a video pop-up that's going to that's really annoying that that's probably going to help you for those short queries. Delay the video pop-up if you have to by by 30 45 seconds. Make it easily dismissible. Pull them in but you have to satisfy that user intent very very quickly or you're you're probably going to send a bad signal. So Cyrus thanks so much for your time here today. You mentioned clients earlier. What kind of clients are you looking for? Who who should who should be contacting Zippy? I don't I don't do a ton of client work these days. I do if it if someone writes me and it's a an interesting problem with an interesting company I'll probably have a conversation with you but I appreciate that David. I do. All right, fair enough. Well and for those who aren't looking to hire Cyrus though where can they where can they stay in touch with you? Do you have a what what's your favorite social platform? Platform is Substack which I'm having a good time on. I I've got back into content publishing and having a good time interacting there and doing research and publishing my results and I'm hope so glad that it led to this conversation today. Awesome. So where what is the address of your Substack? Where should people go? It's zippysignal.signal@zippy.com. Awesome. Very good. So signal signal.zippy.com now? That's right. signal.zyppy.com and we'll link to it in the show notes. So thanks so much again for joining us. I know it's it's early out here on the West Coast so appreciate you being caffeinated and joining us for such a lively conversation. Mike David thank you very much. Thanks Cyrus. >> [music]