# Nathan Gotch's Playbook on Breaking Through SEO with AI

**Expert:** Nathan Gotch

**Source:** https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4BSMNFNhY_E

---

Like that is the biggest problem is like people like me and many other SEOs have ruined blogging. Like we literally ruined blogging. There's literally no point of trackingformational prompts in these platforms. [music] It's borderline pointless because even if you do pop up as a source of retrieval in theformational prompt, no one's clicking that stuff. >> Today's guest is Nathan Gotch, the founder of Gotch SEO Academy and the co-founder of the rankability tool. He's a well-known voice in the space of SEO and you've definitely seen a YouTube video or two from him. Enjoy today's episode. How you got started in SEO cuz your experience is basically you started an agency and then a tool but how did you come about you know getting interested in SEO and making that your life? >> Oh man, it's been such a long time. I have to go way back. So, this actually started in 2011. That's when I kind of got my initial start in in SEO. And it was only because I always loved the internet. I I was like instead of doing my homework in high school, I would play video games. Okay. So, I was like, I always love the internet. And I still remember like even uh using YouTube before Google even owned, right? So, like I was using YouTube like way back then. Little did I know I would actually be creating videos on YouTube, which is kind of a weird thing. But it was in 2011. I was going into my senior year of college and my family wanted me to be a lawyer. So that was kind of like the path I was going to go be a lawyer. I even took the LSAT. Like I I did I went through the motions of of doing it and but secretly I wanted to make money online. So and I didn't tell anyone that. And so I was you know junior year into senior year I was started like looking up ways to make money and stumbled upon a bunch of different techniques. Many of them were super sketchy. You know, I was doing paid surveys and, you know, I was doing trying to sell my college books, like everything I could think of to try to make money. And then I finally found this program that said, "You should start a blog." So, I ended up starting this blog and of course, I didn't have any skills. So, I I just thought like, okay, what could I write about and why would anyone listen to me? But I did know how to do one thing, which was play baseball. So, I was like, "All right, I could write about baseball pitching. That's what I do. I know how to do it, so I can write about that." So, I started I created this blog called The Ultimate Pitcher. I spelled the domain wrong. So it was actually the oitmmitpitcher.com. I didn't notice that for six months. Then I realized didn't matter though. It still was getting results. So anyway, I was creating content there and of course like most people experienced back then, just creating content doesn't produce SEO results. So um so I, you know, I started looking for ways to get more traffic to my site. I stumbled upon this little thing called SEO and I guess the rest is history. So that was like that was kind of the initial thing and I actually ended up going crazy on that website um and just doing SEO on it like crazy and it it grew a lot. I ended up selling it to a former MLB pitcher so it was like kind of a cool thing. It happened. Um >> and you didn't even exact match like Yeah. You didn't need an exact [laughter] match for your URL even and you made it work. >> Yeah. And I mean I had pitcher in there so it was like a partial match but um but yeah it was it was crazy like it was just funny. It was completely spelled wrong. and I didn't even notice. Like I was like, "Oh my god, that's got this really cool name." And little did I know that's why I was available was because it was spelled wrong. Um, but anyway, that was like my first project I worked on. And then after that, it was weird because I I was making money from the site, but like not life-changing money in any way. But the thing that I like really became obsessed about was just this concept of SEO. Like I just loved the concept of SEO. I loved being able to rank websites and not have to pay for ads and being able to drive traffic. Like I just borderline obsession with this. So I started like I would just create websites just to test my skills just to get better and better. And back then I was doing very gray hat, black hat, borderline type of stuff going on. And so that was like you know those are the early stage and I built tons of projects across many different industries and that was kind of how I you know built it my initial skill set. >> Nice. And so how has that obs obsession changed over the years? So for you more so over the decade you've seen the industry go through you know a lot of different things and over the past year it's gone through its most craziest iteration. How do you feel about SEO and AI? How have you sort of pivoted maybe your agency's model to better serve your clients for AI and also for your tool rankability? Talk to me about that. Yeah, I mean I I would say like I've been through so many cycles at this point like obviously Penguin and Panda and EMD update and medic update like I could go down the list of different things and I would say nothing has been crazier than you know when AI was introduced even prior to chat GBT. So like I started using Jasper prior to Jack GBT and I was you know already creating content with AI. So even before that happened but then when that came along I was like okay now we've reached we've reached a new level here and I actually I [clears throat] said this on another interview recently but if you go back and look at my channel I have a video I published this was like December 2022. So it was like a couple weeks after um after ChatG launched and I literally said I was like guys if you're not paying attention to this like you're going to be in trouble. this is like you need to be paying attention to this is like crazy stuff and you should see my comment section. People are like no way this isn't going to do anything. Google's unstoppable. Yeah, that's kind of still true. But still like it, you know, it's the fifth most popular website now. So, you know, it's huge. And obviously chat is not the only AI platform, but for me it's been it's such a radical departure from what we've been used to. And before, you know, SEO was quite simple. You know, when we when we look back on the good old days, like it was pretty simple, right? Like >> in hindsight, in hindsight, it was like easy. >> Yeah. I mean, in hindsight, you build a relevant page, you drive some links to your site, and anyone with a decent amount of skill could do pretty well, right? You didn't need to be like incredibly skilled unless you're getting like really competitive verticals. But for a local business, like not that challenging. Now, it's very different because now it's becoming harder to measure performance. It's not as simple as, you know, just rank, drive traffic, get conversion. Now it's rank, maybe get some clicks, maybe get a conversion, but I'm not entirely sure that conversion came from that source. So, and so it's kind of this weird kind of blackbox kind of to a certain extent. And plus, we're not ranking in blue links really anymore. Like the point of ranking in blue links in my opinion, number one, yes, you can still get traffic. Like people are still getting traffic. I'm still getting traffic. It absolutely can happen, but it's not going to last for much longer. And it the the the path is clear that most of these search experiences are going to be chatbased experiences. I mean, I don't know how we could there's no going back. I I don't think personally, but I do know and we can get into like the tactical stuff on the on the AI side, but it is undoubtedly a fact that public search engines are a big source of retrieval for the AI platforms. So, you know, ranking well in traditional search is still incredibly valuable to influence the AI platforms when it uses retrieval. So, so it's really just changing kind of our goals, I think, is what matters a lot. Like, it used to be obviously, you know, ranking well, in my opinion, I kind of I have two different goals now. Uh, number one is what I call blanketing the SERs. I didn't invent this idea, but it's become even more important, which is ranking as many possible pages as you can on the first page for your most important keywords. So to me that's like the most important thing because I want to try to get as much coverage on the first page for like the most important commercial keywords so that when retrieval occurs at least I'm increasing my odds to influence that response. And is this then also the strategy includes creating your own contact content but also link building right and digital PR because you want or is it yeah ranking for those keywords by any means from your own production like or leveraging you know other links out there like how >> yeah combination combination so uh a little bit of owned assets and a little bit of earned assets combined together I think is kind of the nice formula obviously start with your owned assets because you can actually control that so you know your website. Uh LinkedIn is a really really good ranking vehicle. Like it's it's kind of borderline stupid how well I can rank with LinkedIn. Like I'll just like I have an example. Yeah. If I if you look up like start an SEO agency on on Google, uh you'll see like one of my LinkedIn posts that was me posting a video about how to start an SEO agency. And what's funny about that is a lot of people don't know this, but on LinkedIn you can go into LinkedIn and you can modify the transcript. So, what happens is when like if you go in incognito window, you'll see that Google's just using the transcript from the video on LinkedIn. So, although I have like a little line that says like how to start an SEO agency, like that's literally the content like how to start SEO agency video. It may seem like okay, that's really thin so why would that rank, but it's not because Google's like watching the video. It's just pulling the transcript, right? and LinkedIn LinkedIn has so much authority that and Google's obviously overpowering it as well for whatever reason giving a lot of weight but it just ranks really well. So what I do now is it used to be I would just focus on the site. We'd get the site ranking. We'd focus on traditional link building. We'd grow that site. Used to be the idea. Now what I do is I we focus on the site. We build in the clusters obviously on the site itself. Focus. And by the way, we're not doing much topfunnel content really at all. It's pretty much all middle and bottom of the funnel content. That's it. Like I'm not really touching topfunnel content really at all on any websites anymore. But we can talk more about that on LinkedIn about it. Yeah. >> We will get into it later. >> Yes. Yeah. Yeah. So we we'll talk about why that is. But starting with the website, then the next immediate move we make is we immediately go to YouTube and attack those same topics. So attack those same topics on YouTube. Once we've attacked, we've filled out the cluster there, then we're going to go to LinkedIn. We might use post. and I use LinkedIn Pulse, you know, whatever we feel like depending on the topic. And just those three platforms alone, you can take a lot of real estate uh just from doing those three on Google in particular. Uh but we also know that like if if you've used Perplexity, Perplexity loves YouTube. It's a huge source of retrieval. Like I just actually today I'm I'm doing a presentation on actually agency related stuff and I looked up uh what are the best courses to start an SEO agency and it pulled like three of my YouTube videos as a source of retrieval, right? So it's like there's just a lot of there's a lot of proof of this and like there's so much you can do. Obviously digital PR would be the next level where then you're going to go to the you know all the the uh powerhouses in that industry and try to get published there too. But I think the best place to start is with your owned assets and then you know expand out from there. So yeah, we can get more detailed here but that's just the general idea. >> Nice. Yeah, let's actually go into more detail. So like right now this is like great that you're experimenting with this for your own agency and for your own like uh yeah for rankability as well your own tool >> for small and medium enterprises for businesses what should their workflow be in terms of creating content because there yes we know that multimedia assets like are super helpful right now for LLM. So you need to be everywhere. People are starting to talk about digital PR again and its importance. But how do you sort of structure this workflow? Like how do you kind of uh make it more yeah applicable for your clients in your agency and so that people can like try to do this for themselves? >> Yeah, I think it depends on the business model first. So obviously like for me usually I'm going to put things into buckets. So it'll be like local, ecom, maybe SAS. So the reason I pick those three categories because they're a little bit different uh based on the strategy you want to deploy. So, if you want to, we can kind of just walk through kind of three different examples. >> Let's do that. >> Okay. So, we'll start with local, okay? Cuz local is a a little bit of a unique one compared to the others. So, let's say it's an HVAC business, which is a vertical I know very well. Okay. So, >> and for those for those listening that are not American, maybe HVAC is like ventilation, housing. >> Yeah. Uh yeah, heating, ventilation, and AC. Yep. >> There we go. >> Yeah. So, just heating and cooling. We'll just say that. So these businesses are very very dependent on SEO and inbound marketing because there aren't there's really no consolidation really. There's no uh you know like market leader in in this industry. There's a few like you know SAS companies that service it and you know other things but as far as like the actual uh heating and cooling companies it's highly fragmented at least in the United States. So for our non- US listeners in the United States, like just where I live in, you know, town and country, Missouri, you know, we're probably there's probably 10 to 50 HBAC companies that will just serve my tiny little city of a thousand, you know, 11,000 people. So there's tons of these companies. And just as a side note, if you're starting an SEO agency, one of the best types of markets to get into is markets that have a lot of fragmentation. You you don't want to get into a market where there's a lot of consolidation. So, like an example would be like, you know, I've talked to a lot of people before. We're trying to pick their niches and uh one guy told me that he wanted to start an SEO agency for security companies, home security companies in the US. And I was like, that is a really bad idea because there are like three companies that own like 90% of the market share. So, your chances of building a business are practically impossible uh in that market. So, little side note, but the as far as like deploying the campaign, local's actually the easiest of all as far as this current environment because with HVAC or any local business, the Google business profile and the local pack is king. It's still to this day there really is like none of the AI platforms have really taken much local search market share from Google. Only a little bit possibly, but if you go and look at most of the search demand in chat GBT, local queries is like virtually nothing. like no one is really using it for local queries. Um that could change, right? That could certainly change, but but Google Google's just got a really good product on the local level. It just works really really well. People are used to it. They understand how it works. And so for a business, you know, focusing on the local pack needs to be just number one priority. The local pack is pretty simple. You just need to have an address in the location that you're going after. Number two, you need to drive reviews. And then number three, you need to take care of all the traditional SEO, you know, deliverables, right? So, and like the first two are the most important like location and reviews is like 80% of local back performance. So, you can get you can do a lot with just that. You if you want to go to the next level, you can use an exact match business name, which does certainly take you to the next level, but we won't go down that path. >> That's a nice to have, not a mustave. >> Yeah, exactly. And a lot of businesses, you know, don't have that luxury. They're already established. So, >> and what about ecom actually? Because like how do you then stay competitive in the e-commerce industry and not get sort of like, you know, bulldozed by the giants? Because another controversy of the LLMs is that it serves bigger brands, bigger businesses. You know, it's harder for for smaller ecom sites or smaller agencies who are trying to serve like, you know, these smaller ecom companies to stay relevant and and get some market share. So, how do you how do they kind of make it work? >> Yeah. So um one before I get let me round out the local real quickly because there is one little element here that's a nuance I want to make sure chat GBT and Perplexity and Claude and all the other non-G Googleled AI platforms do not use the Google local pack for the responses in those platforms. So this is a really important point. I think a lot of people have that misconception that like oh if you do well in Google you'll just do well in Chachi. That's not true at all. >> Yeah. No, and it's it it I have heard that a lot, but I like once you really start to dig into this, you'll see that it's not because the reason is because chat GBT when you look up local queries, they are starting to do some geo geo targeting. So like if you look up plumber near me, it will try to find your IP address and try to give you localized results. So it is trying to localize. It's not very good though. Like it's not great yet. it will get better. But like for example, just recently ran a query and uh it thought I was in like I don't know northern Missouri and I'm not even close to there. Right? So it's trying, it's just not there. But the thing is when it when it does retrieval, it's not retrieving from Google. It's retrieving from Bing, number one. And number two, it's often going direct to known really authoritative directories. So like if it's a let's say it's we'll stick with the home services industry. It's going to go directly to Angie. It's going to go directly to Thumbtac. It's going to go directly to Yelp. So it's going to go to these directories and look there and look for businesses that have a lot of reviews, a lot of presence on those platforms. And then it's going to come back and say Joe's Plumbing is the best because of these reviews across all these platforms. So this is why and usually in most cases if a business has a lot of reviews on Google, they probably have a lot of reviews everywhere. But it's not that you know doing well on Google translates to chat GBT or Perplexia the other one. So it's just an important point because I think some people think that and it's it's not the same and so >> really good like brow it's brows kind of expanding browsers as well making sure you're everywhere and the directories as well because I think it's something that people might overlook because that was basically my assumption you know put in more effort into Google reviews. Everyone's asking for a Google review usually, right? But thinking about the other places that you might exist, that's that's really really good. >> Yeah. And and I I just add to that like review diversity. Like obviously Google should be 80% of your work because that's where most of the search demand is going for local, but like the other 20% like I think it just depends on how competitive it is. like for like particular HVAC or HVAC, you know, some of these businesses. I've seen some that have 20,000 reviews on Google and it's truly insane how many review like this industry, they are review generating masters. Like it is crazy. So if you're a brand new company trying to trying to break into that, I mean it's going to take a long time. So, you might be better off like trying to attack some of these kind of third other thirdparty platforms to get some traction there to try to win influence in the other platforms where they're not paying attention. Um, so there's different ways you can chip away, but the point is like once you've hit a certain quantity of reviews in the local business or Google business profiles, you could you start to diversify into the other ones so you can, you know, get that broader exposure. So, um, so that's kind of the first part of local. Uh, that's that's unique in that way. Ecom is really unique. So, man, I feel bad for anyone doing ecom SEO. I really, really do. I would say out of all the industries, it's probably the most impacted. I mean, I personally I have a lot of friends in e-commerce SEO doing doing it for ecom and I feel for them. Tough, tough, tough. And there's a lot of reasons. So, we can get into that uh if you >> as a consumer as well, right? we can see the changes on Google itself and how they're experimenting with you know sort of like um the suggestions for products for ecom products they're kind of favoring certain brands that you had previously already searched so it's sort of like where how do you break through the noise things are no longer familiar and then how does that translate to LLMs do you have any advice or it's kind of just like see where this wave takes you and experiment >> uh well yeah I I think experimentation testing is always the best strategy no matter what I mean because that's how you can truly I mean the thing is you can listen to people on, you know, people like me on YouTube or other things like that, but honestly, like you got to get your hands dirty. That's the only like that's how I learn and that's the best way to learn because you actually see with your own eyes what's really working. There's a few problems with ecom SEO. Number one, chat GBT just launched the shopping feature inside. Okay? And that's going to cause a lot of problems for the main like Okay, so the the main problem right now is that these platforms don't want anyone to leave. They do not want a user to be on chat GBT and then go to Etsy or go to, you know, Walmart or go to even a small little ecom store. They do not want that to happen. They want users to stay on chat GBT. And this model is nothing new, right? This is what LinkedIn does. They punish you for for posting links. X does this, Facebook, they all punish you for anything that tries to get a user off of the website. The only time they're okay with a user leaving the website is when you pay for ads. That's the only time they're okay with it. Any anything organic though, they do not want people to leave. And so, you know, that is the challenge is like how do we get people back to our website? And I think at the end of the day, that's kind of a losing battle regardless. I think what you should do is look look at where these platforms are going and then do your very best to be visible based on the products that they're giving you. So, like in chat GBT for example, we know that they are giving support for e-commerce stores. So, like if you haven't already started changing your store to get featured in Chachu G, you're already behind. Like you should have already when that came out the day that happened, you should have been making changes like right away. And if you're not, that's when the catch-up game is going to start happening. So, and the thing is most of these platforms, they're pretty similar. Like reviews seem to always be the third party signal that influences the LMS a lot. So, on local, as we we mentioned, reviews are big there. ecom reviews on your website, reviews on Etsy, reviews on Amazon, all the cumulative effect of thirdparty signals seems to influence LMS quite a bit. Same with we talk about SAS too. It's the same thing, right? It's getting reviews on G2, Capterra, all these other platforms. And it's it's never just one. It's like I kind of think of like these LLMs or I guess these AI chat platforms is like kind of like soup. like they're just they take everything and it's a cumulative effect of everything that you're doing. It's never just like you know with SEO is like okay just links right we can just look at one signal and you could do pretty well. It's not the same anymore. You have to look at everywhere. Like if you have gaps in any department you're probably going to lose. So yeah. And so like prioritizing for your your customers like how do you I understand now like when you have those different uh different industries you can kind of say okay for local SEO it makes sense to put a lot of effort into making sure you're everywhere where reviews are but if you're somewhere in ecom you need to worry about the reviews but also sort of like optimizing your page to now be part of JGPT shopping and you know it's just sort of very overwhelming and on top of that my next question actually that I really wanted to uh talk about is how has your reporting changed for your clients in terms of metrics? What metrics do matter now? >> Yes. So, this is uh this is probably the one area where I would say anyone that's claiming to be very confident in their ability to attribute leads and sales is probably just being dishonest because it is so incredibly difficult to know for sure where where the origin of a lead came from. It's very very hard and I can just speak just totally anecdotally even my in my own business the journey for someone like we we track we track this very religiously like for my academy for example we know exactly what their journey was because we ask them in great detail when we get on a call we say okay well where'd you find us and we go deep into it to find out for attribution and there'll be people that have literally followed me or watched my content for three years three years of content binging and then a So where you know like are you going to say YouTube's the source? Are you going to say like okay well they watched my YouTube videos for 3 years but then on you know 3 years in one day they decide to go to Google and search Gotcha SEO Academy and now Google gets that attribution. It's it's just a kind of a silly exercise when you really think about it because no one like very rarely are there direct lines to conversion these days. um unless it's something super cheap like you you know that happens but if there's any level of you know investment there's going to be ask chat GPT then go to Google then go to YouTube then ask someone on Instagram and then it's just this wild journey. I think that's the first thing is before we talk about how I'm tracking is just like the state of tracking in general and analytics in my opinion is very very messy. I I just I can't confidently say most the time uh where a lead came from. Like yeah, you can look at the you can look at Google Analytics and say, "Oh, okay, it came from Google." But >> it's mostly gueststimates at this point and you put more weight into your quantitative qualitative research after acquiring >> a customer to then build from that. That that's something that you can't do at scale. You can't have like a really fancy dashboard for, but seems to be the most like insightful. So, so, okay, so let's walk through kind of like how I'm doing my best to try to find attribution. Okay, so number one, a lot of free tools can help a lot. Okay, so Google Analytics G4, as much as people hate it, you know, it can still do a decent job. You got to add some filters in there specifically to to extract the AI platform traffic out of there. You can just use chatt and you can kind of work through and find the formula. It's not super hard. Um, but you can filter it out so you can see the buckets of different traffic. So like as far as the buckets that matter the most, at least for me personally, which is in SEO, obviously, Google's the big bucket. YouTube is also a very big bucket. Uh at least in my in my business, like YouTube is like I think my second biggest traffic source. And then aside from that, I've got a bucket for uh AI platforms. So within that AI bucket platform or u bucket of AI platforms, you're going to have chat, GBT, Perplexity, Claude, Deepseek, Groc, you know, all the usual suspects in there. So you want to be able to track that specifically and referral traffic from AI platforms is pretty minuscule. It's very very small. It's about on par with you know X or LinkedIn right you're not going to get a ton but it's at least worth tracking like that bucket to see how it is going. So that's the first thing is get Google Analytics set up. Google search console is actually really valuable uh in a way that a lot of people don't realize. So obviously it's useful for Google, but you can logically deduce when you look up queries in Google search console what I'm calling like extreme longtail queries. So you can use a reject formula to find these queries that are like seven or eight words or longer, right? So we're talking like really really long queries. And the reason is because it's very likely that those types of queries are used in Google's AI mode. So, and if they're using Google's AI mode, we can pretty, you know, fairly guess that that's the type of query that would be used in chat GBT and the other platforms knowing that the query lengths are very very long. So, that's one thing too is you can actually add a filter so that you can track the growth of those extreme longtail queries in Google Search Console. So, and the way that I do it is I use uh Google Analytics 4 and Google Search Console and I feed that into Looker Studio. So that way I can get a nice overview like okay we've got our AI traffic growing here. We've got these queries you know that are popping up now. And so that's kind of like free stuff you can do okay just with that. And then a couple other pieces of the tracking is obviously actually tracking the AI generator responses themselves. And this is a very interesting area because there's like 500 tools that you can pick from to do this for you. You can do it for free though. You don't have to use any of these tools. There's some good ones out there. There's some very very bad ones out there, but but as far as doing it the free way, it's actually stupidly simple. This is the thing that's kind of funny. Doing it manually is probably the most accurate way to do it. Hands down. Like if you want to get the the best accurate data for tracking AI generated responses, doing it manually is hands down the best. Like no tool could compete with it because you're getting like actual experience inside of inside of the tool itself instead of >> Yeah. instead of an API or through you know some of these other tools are doing some sketchier kind of scraping stuff. So you know it's it's not the same. Um so what I so what I teach people in the academy is and you know you you can judge this how you like but this is the way you really have to do it which is like you have to go create free accounts across all these platforms. So what I do is you know go chat GT perplex it has to be a fresh account with no personalization no historical precedent nothing. So you go and create the accounts with a little, you know, Gmail or something. And then what you do is you build out commercial prompts for whatever product you're trying to promote. So it would be something like, you know, what are the best SEO training programs for agencies uh in 2025, right? Something like that. Run that prompt through. You see, you'll find all the programs. You extract those brands out of there and you see if you're present or not. That's kind of like step one is like just simple coverage. Yes or no? Are we there? Simple as that. run that same prompt against perplexity and grock and across all of them. Then you get a nice a nice view of like okay so we're visible on one out of five or you know two out of five and then you get a rough idea. That's the first part. Second part is within that response where do we show up? Are we the f are we the number one recommended or are we the number 11th recommended? Because then from there you take just your coverage plus your position and then you can get kind of like a share of voice metric. So basically measuring like okay based on uh the quantity of responses our position we can get a rough idea of like the percentage that we own in these responses essentially and then from there that can be a good benchmark that you can work from right so you can say okay we're not doing too hot like most people most businesses I run through this process are not doing that great like unless you're really established like you guys would probably do pretty well right if I look up like best you know I don't know extension best SEO extensions you guys are pop up, right? So, um, but for most people, they don't. And, and then that's like, so I think the most important thing right now is figure out a way to just establish benchmarks. Once you've got the benchmarks established, you know, it takes a while to influence these platforms. So, you should just work for the next 3 to 6 months and then run it again and see if you if anything has changed for you. Investing in a tool is a good idea if you need broader scale, right? If you're you're a tiny little business with one product, like you don't need some overkill AI tracking tool. That's just it's not necessary. But if you are running multiple campaigns, you're an agency, you're you know, you're you want to track like, you know, 25 to 50 prompts per campaign, you're going to need a tool. It's just going to be way too hard manually to do it. But that's kind of the first part of this. And like for AI, like specifically AI platform tracking, like the AI generated responses, that's the most important thing. Are we being recommended in commercial prompts? That's what matters. There's literally no point of trackingformational prompts in these platforms. It's borderline pointless because even if you do pop up as a source of retrieval in theformational prompt, no one's clicking that stuff. Like it it's just not going to happen. And to segue really quickly based on your opinion on a informational prop because as I quote you have a little LinkedIn post out that's slightly controversial where you said and I quote please don't waste your time or money turnurning out blog post for SEO. So do you mean like generic post overall or these informational you know posts that people have been making for blogs for top of the funnel because you kind of mentioned that SEO blogs are no it's just basically noise. So what kind of content formats actually still matter in 2025, 2026 for LLMs? >> Yeah. So I'm very opposed to a lot offormational content. And the reason is because and by the way, I've lived through these cycles. I have been a practitioner of usingformational content for a decade. I know what it looks like. I know how it works. And I have benefited from it for many, many years. You know, I used to be the person creating how to build back links and it'd be 10,000 words and I did all that, right? Like I I know what it's like. But the problem is when you create content like that now, it's not the same because the reward used to be, okay, I'm going to build out this like really really big guide and I'm going to rank on Google and I'm going to get organic traffic, right? And then I can I can push people deeper into the funnel. So if they're looking for backlinks, I could say, "Okay, hey, check out my, you know, my link building training, right? I could I could push them in that direction. I could promote a lead magnet. All that good stuff. There was a reward for doing that. Like there was a clear reward. But now when you do that, even let's say let's say by some miracle you rank in traditional SERs with thatformational content, thatformational topic. Well, yeah, you might get some organic traffic from Google if you're able to battle through the 500 search features that you have to try to compete against, which is videos and people also ask and AI overviews and you name it. There's so many distractions now just in Google alone, traditional SERs, that you're basically fighting for scraps of CTR, and it's really, really difficult. So, that's already problem number one. Problem number two is when you create that content and let's say once again by some miracle you become a source of retrieval when someone searches a similar topic in chat GBT. What is the incentive for someone to get an AI generated response and then decide you know what I'm going to do today? I'm just going to click through on this citation that's buried and ba basically invisible and I'm going to go to this website and I'm going to read something that's way longer. It's not the way humans really work. And it's much more likely that someone in chat GBT is going to say, you know, they get a little response like, "Okay, well, clarify this and then clarify that." And then by the end of it, they've got a full chat dialogue about that one topic. And there's no reason for them to. There's just like there's really not any incentive because on top of it, Chat GBT took that information. Not saying this is fair, but I'm just saying that's what happens. chat because you took that beautiful blog post you spent god knows how long writing and now it's just synthesizing all that information and using it and just regurgitating it back to the user. So that's what I that's the issue I have because it's more thinking about like is this even worth it [laughter] and that's the tricky part. So yeah >> a follow-up question to this but isn't it still necessary to sort of like write that great piece grand piece of content in detail because it's still sort of helping your brand relevance. So even though it's sort of being cut and you know shipped out on chat GPT, it still is a retrieval and sort of helps with branding and helps with sort of building thought leadership. I'm just playing devil's advocate here. >> No, it's because it's quite a controversial statement, right, to sort of also be like you should no longer makeformational content or should it just then be a smaller part of the content strategy for a company? Well, so the informational content part is the angle I'm specifically referencing is a keyword ccentric informational topic that's top of the funnel that has is very far from conversion. So that style of content to me using your um your question I would if I was thinking about like how am I going to spend my dollars in the best way possible because this is what like this is what I'm thinking about is like okay I'm going to spend my dollars in the best way possible. I have two I have a couple options. I take this topic, I take an absolute gamble to create this content that could take me a very long time to build. I publish it on our website and it gets a little trickle of, you know, traffic from the AI platforms from some someone accidentally clicking on a citation. So that's option one. Maybe get some traffic from Google. You know, that's my that's option one. Option two is I take that same exact topic and I just create a YouTube video. And that YouTube video gets way more engagement. It ranks on Google easily because it's YouTube. Number two, number three, it acts as a source of retrieval in the AI platforms. So, it's literally getting the same effect, but with less effort, less investment, and more impact. So, this is like where it's just becoming hard to justify it. And I'm okay with it when it's my own dollars, right? Like if I'm willing to risk my own dollars, but when you're working with a business and it's their dollars and you're having to think about like how do I where am I going to allocate these funds, where are we going to push these to get the biggest impact for them and I have to say, "Hey, Mr. Business owner, we're going to publish some blog posts this month. We might get some traffic. I don't know." Like it's just a really hard thing to sell. And so this is not to say that informational content, thought leadership, case studies, things like that that go on the blog, those are incredibly useful, but those cannot be replicated by the AI. So the things that concern me like when I'm thinking about the the like keyword selection process is like, okay, take a topic, how to build backlinks. Could I theoretically create a piece of content that's better than the AI? Yes, I could. I have no doubt I could beat the AI. I have more visuals. I'd have more stuff that's, you know, my style. like I could beat the AI in a onetoone battle. But the problem is that's just not the way, you know, that's just not the nature of how things are now, right? And that's so for me it's like the AI, if the AI can do it 60% as well as I can, that's very concerning, right? And I'm not going to waste my time spending 40 hours building some asset that, you know, potentially is going to die out in two months. And that used to work. That used to work. But I just I I think it's risky is all the is the is the main takeaway. The clickbait element of my post. The big takeaway here is about the risk versus reward and you know. Yeah. So go ahead. Yeah. >> No. And so for now this is something that you're sort of like spending less time on or is it just you're cautious about not putting as much effort into this cuz as you said like this is something that helped build your brand, right? Like creating content like this. It's it's given you like a huge leverage so to sort of like advise it to other people to kind of like you know hey stop right now. this is maybe not necessary. You need a bit more context, you know. >> Yeah. Well, and and I do mention in the post that to take thoseformational topics and focus on the platforms that are already giving a lot of reach and a lot of impressions. So, it's not that we're taking these topics and saying, I'm never going to talk about these things again. It's more of like where am I going to place this this value, this this information? And we've have a lot of options now. Like, you don't have to do it on your blog. That's not a requirement. And especially like working with a business that has a DR of zero and then I'm going to go and build up their blog with a bunch of content that's never going to rank. It just doesn't make a lot of sense. I'd rather just go to LinkedIn and publish a post where I've got a DR97 that can lift me up no problem um and get the same outcome basically. So it's more of like thinking like okay where am I going to spend my dollars and my time. Now I think it is important to mention like okay if you're like what do you create on a blog like that that's something that's a good question to ask like at this point and like for me once again my opinion I'm just not going the route of straight informational content on blogs probably again I think that's probably for me I'm I'm moving away from that what I'm going towards though is the blog is actually going back to the good old days of blogging when people used blogs to actually create good stuff and not just created purely for SEO like that is the biggest problem is like people like me and many other SEOs have ruined blogging. Like we literally ruined blogging. >> That's why everyone's going to suck. >> Yeah. Yeah. And so like you know I am I am totally guilty of have giving these recommendations to people for many many years which is like just build up your blog focus on keywords. Don't talk about anything other than a keyword. And like I'm guilty of that. I did that and I gave that that advice a lot because it worked. And uh but the problem is like if you go back to the early days of blogging, people didn't really care a lot about the SEO piece. It was more about sharing your expertise. Like even when I started my blog on Gotcha SEO for the first time, like I could go back and look at my oldest content. Like I just looked the other day. It was like um one of my posts was SEO case study how to use uh spun content to rank. So like that was like one of my you know that was a blog post and like it was really popular. I was like just showing like, hey, here's how I did this sketchy thing to rank, so here it is. Um, and like that's what blogging that's when blogging was good was it was just like you're just sharing, you know, the stuff you're working on. And I think that to me is the future if not what it should be already like focusing more on like okay, you know, we did this thing, we got this result. So documentation, case studies, results, things that the AI cannot do. And I think that should be a part of like the keyword qualification and prioritization process is like for many years it was really a quantitative reasons to pick a keyword or not you know the intent where if it's in the funnel the volume the KD like all that stuff but I think there needs to be a little checkpoint now like can AI easily do this and I think that just it's not that you don't do it it's just that you think about it for a second like okay is it a gamble right and I think it just needs to be a consideration that's all >> and this makes sense It also goes back to like how it's becoming more difficult to also attribute, you know, with attribution. So, you can't justify creating these sort of content anymore. So, thanks for clarifying. Makes makes a lot of sense. Before I move into my rapid fire round, I have one quick question that I wanted to talk about rankability because I see that you're also positioning rankability for being more uh you know for for rankability's future to be less dependent on clicks and keyword volume and you've introduced AI anali analyzer. Uh I wanted to ask how does it work and is it essentially a brand monitoring part of the tool to sort of calculate share of voice? Talk to me about the the future of rankability. >> Yeah. Well, fortunately, we know when we started building this, we didn't expect all these changes to occur and but the good news like the way we built it fortunately also works in the context of chatb. So, we're really grateful for that. Um so, like our content optimizer is like really really good for um for doing the things that we need to be doing as far as optimizing pages. like that still matters. Relevance still matters. So the tool still matters in that way. But we also know that like we need the ability to track. And honestly the the funny thing is the only reason I even decided to push this AI analyzer is because I had created so many YouTube videos where I was showing people how to track this stuff. And I was like this is just so inefficient. Like I was like doing all this crazy stuff to try to like show how to track all these things. And then I sat down one day. I'm like why am I doing all this? just build a tool that tracks all this and then come to find out there are a bunch of tools that already did that. Um but then I was like well okay I'm going to solve my own problem. So but I we have let's just say we studied our competitors. We know what they do and we're doing things a little bit differently. So and I can't really talk too much about because it's not out yet but but the thing is like we're we've kind of come up with our own metric uh for this. So share voices, it's kind of like that, but we've got we've got a metric that's a little bit different because it's b it's weighted. It's a weighted metric uh that we're going to be launching. Basically, it's very simple. The way the tool works is you just run, you know, you run your commercial queries, your prompts through there, and then we go and we actually go and see where the brand ranks across all theirs. So instead of spending many hours manually inputting things, you just put it in, and then boom, we go do all the work and come back and say, here it is. So it's pretty simple in that way. And we're also looking at citations, too. But the main focus is the AI generator responses. I think that's what matters the most because being recommended by the AI is way more important than just being a citation because the citations they're buried and it's probably going to be the way it's I don't think they're going to become more visible. I think they'll only get less visible. So because I I just don't think these platforms want people to click. So yeah, unless it's stays on there. Yeah. >> And what's the weight if you can share the waiting that you're using to entice >> Well, just waiting based on the platforms because one of the things we've seen on a lot of these tools is they just treat every platform like they're the same and they're not the same. Like Claude is really small compared to chat GPT. So like if you're waiting them exactly the same like okay yeah you have visibility on Claude but you're invisible on Google. Those are not the same. Being invisible on Google is way more detrimental for your business than being invisible on Deep Sea. So like unless you're in China, like if you're in China, being, you know, invisible on Deep Seek is a really bad thing. But if you're in the US, doesn't hurt you that much being invisible there. So it hurts you a lot more being invisible on chat GBT or Google's AI mode or some of these other platforms. So it's more about waiting based on, you know, the impact. Uh that's one one element of >> of the LLM and then also possibly then waiting for country because there's also different in terms of like adoption or is that is that version two? >> We have many versions planned. Uh the first version is probably more going to be platform focused. So yep. >> Nice. Let's move on to the final section or final part of the interview. It's called the rapid fire round and I'm going to basically just ask you about your AI hot takes. So short answers are fine. Uh, but if there's something's juicy enough, I'll get into I'll I'll, you know, push you for more details if that's okay. >> Sure. >> Nice. First question. Do you use LLMs outside of work or just on the job? >> Oh my gosh. For everything. Everything. Yeah. I mean, I I use it for recipes. I use it for cooking. Like Yeah. I mean, I literally everything. Wait, so for recipes, have you built your own like I'm trying to build my own little AI agent to help me with meal prepping and meal planning because I also have, you know, my bookmarks of recipes across all like social media platforms like, you know, random bookmark tools. How are you using it? Do you have any like hacks? >> I actually have a new hack that I'm currently deploying is using Notebook LM. So using Notebook LM, you can build a notebook and then put all of your recipes into that notebook. Um, and so that's one of the things I'm I'm starting to play with. I've been really into Notebook LM. So, that's kind of the first one. Uh, but yeah, usually sometimes it's something simple like I'll be like making a steak and then I'll be like, I need to get like a butter topping for this steak and I just got chatbt and tell me something. I'm like, cool, do it. And then I'm just good. Now, I feel bad for recipe blogs. Another example here. Um, you know, I'm not clicking through. So, >> you know, but we still need them in the LLMs, right? Great content. like you can't discourage like >> they're wrong for what it was meant to be. You know, >> they are. But the thing is like I think it's important to mention I am not for the AI being this way. I think it's wrong what it's this whole thing that's gone on with stealing people's content and not rewarding them. But unfortunately, you know, not much we can do about it. So, at least at this point. So, yeah. I mean, it's it's it's actually kind of sad to be honest because a lot of people have worked really really hard on their blogs and their websites and even myself, I've spent ungodly amounts of hours on my content just for it to be scraped and repackaged and reused by the AI. But, you know, I don't have time to sit back and just be sad about it. I have to actually do something. So, you know, it's it is unfortunate, but you can't change. The market is the market and it could be very very ruthless and uh >> it's sort of just repackaging, right? It's still like the work that's there. It still sort of serves a purpose right now in terms of visibility, but like Yeah. Not in terms of like selling. Yeah. Getting someone to the finish line. But >> yeah. Well, yeah. I mean, yeah. I mean, if it the unfortunately like in the that one simple anecdotal example like someone made that recipe because the AI is not sentient. It can't just make things up. It can't build anything. It only just for a lack of better word steals and repackages. So the unfortunate thing is like that seed was created by a person but now the AI knows the answer because they created it and therefore in a lot of cases when I search recipes there's no retrieval used. It's just straight from the raw training data that's being pulled. There's not a single link. How do you win there? That's that's hard. >> It is. >> Yep. >> What's your favorite LLM then? >> Oo that's a good question. I mean Chat GMT is like my daily driver. Like it's my daily driver. are used every day. But I would say Claude is probably my second favorite just because I use Replet and Replet uses Claude and Claude to me is really good for coding related stuff. Uh really technical things. It's also really good for writing as well. I think it's I think it it definitely rivals Chat GBT as far as writing quality. Um so I would say those two definitely the most. I use Gemini here and there for you know Google sheet related stuff but it's pretty much chat GBT and um and Claude. Yeah. Well, for the technical work, charge GPT for quick. >> Exactly. >> What's one SEO task that you never want to do manually again? >> Wow. One. I have like a hundred I could list. I mean, I've been careful not to talk about this too much just because I don't want people to get into what I'm doing and then go too deep into a rabbit hole. But I'm going to be totally honest. There are some campaigns I'm working on where they're almost fully AI. Like everything is AI. like technical SEO, content, linkbait, every piece of a piece of process is AI driven. Um, and I'm able to do it via Replet. It's pretty crazy. So, like I like rankability for example, the entire site was built with Replet. The whole site was built with Replet. Every single page on that site was built with Replet. Obviously using rankability as well for content related stuff, but like it's fully AI everything. And uh you know I'm doing internal linking with AI. I'm building site architecture with AI. I'm optimizing loading speed with AI. Anything literally any SEO thing that you can think of, I can do it in Replet. There's not a single thing I can't do on site. It's pretty insane. So, and like I said, I I am like kind of crazy with this stuff and I'm willing to make a lot of mistakes and I'm willing to go through the grind to figure it out. I don't think it's for everyone. And I don't think every website can use replet in the way that I'm using like ecom don't even do it. >> How have you set this up so that you can actually like sort of experiment and like integrate these like AI workflows? Talk us through your like uh text. >> Yeah. Well, the good news is the tech stack is actually really simple because most of it is through replet because replet already has the technology baked in. uh like for example so if you use lovable or replet or any noode AIdriven uh agent platform to like create a site uh the problem is out of the box it's almost always JavaScript like almost always the site is going to be JavaScript it's not going to be HTML it's not going to be very crawable it's it's a real problem so I figured out a workaround this only through a lot of experimentation rep I only use replet by the way I don't have I can't vouch for any of the other ones I'm not even an affiliate of replet so use what you want I don't care But I'm just saying I use Replet. What I discovered is with Replet, it's going to push JavaScript based websites, which means it's not going to be very crawable or indexable by Google traditional search engines. Google claims they can render JavaScript. I don't really believe them. So I think HTML is the only safe route for anything you're trying to do. We also know that the LLMs, they are very archaic and they only like HTML. Like don't even try to have a JavaScript site if you want any visibility there. So, um, so that's the first thing is what I do is I'll create the project and I'll do incredibly simple prompt. Create me a one-pager. I'm a SEO consultant in St. Louis. Just make me a one pager. I'll do like a oneline prompt because I know what it's going to do. It's going to create JavaScript. And by the way, if you tell replet to create you an HTML like Astro framework type of website, it will say it can't do it. I can't do that. No, I can't do that. But it can. It can. And I have proof of it. And so what happens is you tell it to do just tell it to create a generic website. It will do go through do its thing. It will create you know this JavaScript design. As soon as it's done I say okay now convert it to HTML via Astro and then it'll say uh you know start to freak out. And then what I do is when it starts to freak out I'll go to chat GBT. I'll use the reason model and I'll say explain to replet how to build uh you know this site in Astro. And so then it will explain I feed that into replet and then it builds the astro components that are necessary for an HTML driven site. So >> oh >> that's what happens >> you breadcrumbmed it basically and you brought in chat GPT for reinforcement. >> I did and I have the I have chat GBT tell replet what to do sometimes. It's a weird it's like AI talking to AI. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. And and by the way I'm not super technical like I'm not I'm not like a coder or programmer or anything like that. like I need this extra support to be able to figure it out. Only through experimentation now do I understand how Astro works. I didn't know before. And so now I know how it works. But like there's just small little details when you use these tools cuz the agents as good as they are, they are not without their problems. And one of their biggest problems is number one overconfidence. They when they do something they act like it's perfect. Uh I'm done. I did it. It's perfect. Then you go and look at and do some QA and you're like what what is this? like this isn't even what I asked for. It's totally off the rails. So that will happen. Number two will just hallucinate, right? Like you'll say do this, it does something off the rails that you didn't even know it could do, right? That happens. And so I've had to learn a lot of things that I wasn't skilled with, which is like version control and being able to back up the site and like because I've had to rebuild so many sites now at this point because it's hallucinated so badly that now I have like 50 checks in place to prevent that from happening. And so, like I said, this is why I'm afraid to tell people to use these platforms because like I'm pretty skilled at this and not because I'm like good at coding or something, but just because I've literally made a thousand mistakes in the last 6 months doing this. And you know, if you use it, it's like it's so highowered. And if you use it the wrong way, it it is just can really make you want to throw your computer, you know, out the window. I mean it is really you like spend the whole day building a site and then you say like I need you to change the button color here. It deletes the whole website. It is very very volatile and >> coding can turn dark. >> It it can and um you have to be willing to accept that that could happen but you do need to put the checks in place to prevent. So if something does go off you can always you know revert back. >> Will you be sharing the 50 checks uh the checklist? >> I will probably only share that with the academy members. So yeah, but yeah, but it's um like I said, I do think there's a situation where if you're working with like local businesses, you could theoretically run a whole campaign from building a new site to operating the whole SEO campaign all with agents. I think it I think there's a situation where that is entirely possible with agents and AI combined together. It can be done. Um I'm very confident it can be done. I mean, I'm literally already doing it like with my own stuff, so it can be done. It's just there's a learning curve. So yeah, >> I I wanted to really talk about the limiting factor that is like these sites created by our JavaScript and you know the the whole the current hot topic in the industry is HTML. We need to make sure that the LLMs can scrape. So it's great that you found a nifty little workaround. Um so my next question would actually be one AI feature product you wish existed but essentially you're building you're maggyvering it. >> That's a good way to describe it. Yeah, for sure. Um yeah, I mean it's definitely like it's a duct tape type of strategy, but it's working and I feel confident that um you know every new project I build becomes more efficient and there's less mistakes. So it's not there's always mistakes. That's in anything you're doing. Like you hire a web designer. I mean you're going to deal with a lot with a designer then you bring in a developer. Like I we have a whole team of developers for rankability. My partner spends every waking moment talking to the development team with our software. like every waking moment. So like that's why I think it's so funny when people get so mad at the AI for like making mistakes. It's like have you worked with humans before? Like humans make a lot of mistakes too. But the thing I have to say this is like once again going back we this kind of been the topic of our discussion here is like you know almost like AI is kind of unfair in some ways like this environment has made things kind of just it is just kind of unfair because like replet's another example like I built um I think we have 85 pages roughly on rankability. I think it cost me less than $1,000. Oh, I mean that's just like pretty crazy cuz that would have cost 85 grand. I mean honestly at least 85 maybe $100,000 when you think about content design everything you talking like so you talk about the cost savings of that is just crazy and you know the we're just it's a it's a weird time. That's all I can say. It's just a weird time. So >> and I I guess the the take takeaway from this is experiment become a vibe coder or be replaced. [laughter] >> Yeah. I don't know about that. But but yeah, I mean I think I think if you're running an agency and you're thinking about how do we increase our profit margin? How do we become more effective? How do we become more efficient? I just can't even fathom that someone wouldn't be playing with these tools. I mean, they are I don't know. I I just I can't even believe someone would want to try them because they're just they they can literally do so much. And I I've I've given this recommendation to people in the academy and like it's like once you open Pandora's box, there's no going back. I mean these things once you see what's possible like even just for fun the only reason I know about rep is because someone in my academy came to one of our calls one day he's like hey have you tried this replet thing and I'm like no what is it he's like well you can just like build a site in like 5 minutes and I'm like okay and I was like super skeptical of course I was like there's no way this could do and so I started playing with it this is like how I felt when chat GBT came out I was like this is going to be a real problem and then I just for fun I spun up a side project and This is a pocket. I don't know if you use pocket the extension. Uh but it shut down. Um and it's just like it's like a book. You mentioned earlier a bookmark um you know type of platform. Uh we're using like raindrop or something like that. Some sort of bookmark. >> Yeah. But you were saying about pocket like >> Yeah. I've not I've not used pocket. I used to use pocket before but then I stopped using it because my pocket got overflowed and I did not go and organize it. [laughter] >> Yeah. Right. So Mozilla shut it down. So they like they purchased it and then many you know recently they like literally shut it down. I don't know why. So but anyway I was like all right I'm just going to see if it's possible. I'm going to try something. So I went and I uh created a little SAS business for pocket alternatives and it's called collected. And I just for fun I built the entire business on Replet. So, I built a front end, I built the back end, um, and within 30 days, I was already generating revenue for that SAS, like over $1,000 a month in like 30 days. Cuz of course, I used SEO, you know, I used SEO to rank for pocket alternatives and did all that stuff. But, but I was like, that was for me the catalyst. I was like, okay, this is just unbelievable. Like, I literally built a SAS business in less than 30 days and was like revenue generating SAS business for like 500 bucks. Oh, >> yeah. That's insane. >> Yeah. Yeah. And also, by the way, on that particular website, I don't even touch it basically at all. It was just a little fun project, but it does get customer support queries that come into the email and I take those customer support queries and I put them into Replet and I say respond to these handle this and respond to them. I don't even respond to the the customer support. I just have Replet do it. So, >> and sorry, is it collect read? Right. >> Collect read. Yeah, collect. >> I see it ranking. It's there, guys. It's legit. >> Yeah. I'm probably going to shut it down at some point because I don't have time for it. But if someone wants someone wants it, I'll just give it to you. I literally don't have time for it. But but yeah, >> exactly. Exactly. So >> um so yeah, my next question was yeah, most underrated AI use case right now, but I feel uh yeah, do do you have anything to add to that? You've sort of like um touched on I feel like you're more like you have so many ideas where you you could test it on AI. So but is there something that like is a is a hidden gem for you? >> Underrated use case. I mean, I think pretty much everyone knows the capabilities of AI at this point. I don't know if there's anything else I can I mean, I think the only area to be honest that I haven't played with enough is definitely, you know, with like nan or uh automation related stuff or like the MCP servers. I haven't really done a lot of that just because I haven't really needed to cuz like I don't really need to use automation when the agent does like everything. So, you know, it's kind of like I haven't felt the I there's I haven't found like a use case where I've personally needed it, but I've seen some other people doing like crazy automations. So, I think that's one area where I think having some deep work sessions around that would probably be a good idea. I think there's some good use cases. So, yeah. >> And have you previously maybe made use of APIs in like Zapia to >> but then you've just not sort of made the jump to because you could kind of do it with the agents uh already. Yeah, I've been I mean I've been using you know if this then that for ever type of thing. You know Zapier is obviously we use that across our businesses. I I just haven't really found like why do I need I don't really know what I need to use it for. Like I think a lot of the people that are using it a lot of them are like selling courses. So they're like look at my crazy automation. It's like this crazy thing to like answer an email. I'm like couldn't you just I don't know. It just seems a little like overkill. Yeah. Exactly. So I I I think you know for me I focus on the stuff that's really really impactful and I'll just say like agents obviously vibe coding is a big one obviously using AI for content it's pretty much proven if you do a good job with that it ranks very well I mean I have content ranking actually I just got rid of that blog blog post but it was ranking with GBT3 I had a lot of blog posts ranking for GBT3 that was so before chat GBT with Jasper like I still had content ranking with that and it was garbage and it was still ranking like no completely written with Jasper. >> It's completely Jasper. Yep. Fully Jaspered. The only the only thing I did was add custom visuals in it, but that was it. So, um, and now like the AI is a billion times better at writing. So, so like writing, coding. I mean, the other big one too that I use a ton is deep research. Deep research is like my one of my favorite tools because you could just do so much with it. Um, and then uh even using the reasoning models. Like a lot of people don't realize with the reasoning models like in chat GBT if you do the deep reasoning they keep changing the names of the reasoning it's like now it's like they just changed it yesterday to something else again >> it was it was thinking but you could do like extended thinking or but now it's like they changed it again they keep I don't know they keep modifying but the point is it's a reasoning model and it's kind of a you can use it as a shortcut for deep research because the deep research is usually overkill for a lot of use cases. So you if you turn on the um the deep reasoning and then ask it to research, it will act kind of like it's like a it's like a deep research light. Um and I use that in a lot of cases and it seems to be it's pretty efficient in that way because it doesn't take as long and it's you know if you're trying to get a project done a lot quicker. Um and then using the agent within chat GBT is also big too. So in in some of my videos I show like how to find listical opportunities and various thirdparty opportunities. I mean the agent can do that all day. Yeah. So for you, yeah, my other next question would be AI agents overkill or overdue? It sounds like it's overdue for you. You're basically making use of it. >> I'm already I've been using them. Yeah. Yeah, I use them a lot. >> Second last question. Build or buy your AI workflow? >> Uh what do you mean by that? Yeah. >> So would you build it seems like you are building your own AI workflows to be fair you know buy u buy AI workflows from these tools or from people that are making these automations using these automation tools these MCPS maybe to like retrieve data from Screaming Frog and then like publish it somewhere else from your database etc. >> I think I think this is definitely a like a a personal preference type of question just because I think about my behavior more than anything and my behavior is I like to understand how it works. I don't want to just buy it and say like here it is without me fullying under I want to know what's happening under the hood so I fully understand it and so for me I'm definitely going to be a builder. Absolutely. Yeah. I just that's how I learned. So yeah. >> Nice. Very last question. One word to describe the future of SEO. >> One. >> This you have to be short about it. >> I would say alive. It's definitely alive. So yeah >> it's sentient. >> Yeah. Yeah. It's not Yeah. Not quite there. I know they keep saying AGI is coming but I don't think we're there yet. If you use a vibe coder, you'll realize AGI is not here. So, but yeah, I mean I I just I'm I'm definitely more optimistic than most people typically and just because I just see so much opportunity. I I I feel I wasn't like there's people been in SEO way longer than me. Like I I got in SEO obviously in in 2011 2012. That was when I got into it. So people had been already playing with the search engines for a long time before I got into it. But when I discovered SEO back then, it was like I found gold. Like that's how I felt. I was like, "This is like I just found gold and I'm going to go all in on this." That's how I felt. That's how I feel now with AI. I feel like this is like this feels even bigger than when I discovered SEO. I'm like the opportunity in right now, like if you're not seizing and using this technology, I feel bad, but I think a lot of people are going to get left behind. I do really feel that is going to happen. And um I I've just been seeing a lot of people sticking their head in the sand for now many years that this technology has been here and they're still not adopting it. And I mean it's just unfortunate. I I really think like you need to you need to like book out a Saturday and close the blinds, black out your windows and just spend one whole day using one of these tools and don't come out of your cave until you've actually seen the power. And then once you've done that, you will change your perspective. But a lot of people like, "Yeah, yeah, I'll get to it." Or, "Yeah, yeah, or it's not moving that fast. Google's still so big." And these types of things are just I think, and by the way, I try to stay in the middle as much as I can. Like extreme optimism and extreme pessimism, but I just think, you know, like the old school SEO stuff, like if you're still doing that, you're going like, it's going to be bad. It's going to be bad. You you need to understand these AI platforms. like at a bare minimum, you need to fully understand how they work. You need to fully understand how to get brands visible in there. I just don't see a future where people aren't going to be using these platforms and I think they're going to become even better at answering questions. So your time spent now is it like if you would put a percentage to it is it like 70% on AI LLM's like you know trying to understand how to get mentioned there and also testing out the tools and then maybe 30% on traditional SEO or are you 100% into AI and LLM and you've just sort of automated your SEO housekeeping. >> This is where it's tricky because I I would say yes 100% of my mind is focused on it the AI platforms and the AI products 100% of my mind. However, as far as execution, to influence the AI platforms, you have to do traditional SEO. Doing SEO is just a part of what I'm doing anyway. But like I've been telling people, it's kind of like like keep doing everything you were already doing basically. Like just keep doing everything you're already doing with SEO. Like you don't really need to change a whole lot if you're doing things the right way. Of course, not assuming assuming things are being done the right way, which is a different discussion altogether. But then I view it as like that's 80%. The other 20% is the stuff that you're not used to doing, the stuff that the LLMs use that didn't really matter for SEO, right? And oh, like one last, you know, before we sign off here, one little anecdotal example, okay? You'll see a lot of people saying that AI SEO or AI search optimization, GEO, you you whatever acronym you want, right? But just as far as driving performance on those AI platforms that it's just SEO. And I've I've seen that exact phrase so many times in the last year. And I can tell you there's truth to that. There's definitely truth to that that SEO does absolutely influence when retrieval is used. But a small example of this, okay, I have ranked number one, maybe sometimes I drop to number two or three for St. Louis SEO. Okay, if you look that up, I have ranked for that, I am not kidding, for probably a decade. Okay, you will find it. Like look up St. Louis SEO, you'll probably find my little one pager. It's been there forever. Okay. And this one little pager destroys every huge agency in this area. One little stupid little one pager. All right. I built it. Actually, this is I built this one just for the academy to show people how powerful exact match domains are. So, I did that. But just to give an example of this. If let's take that concept of, you know, AI SEO is just SEO. Okay. Well, if that is true, then this little website should crush it across AI platforms because it crushes traditional SEO all day. And it's been doing it for an extended amount of time. It isn't new. It's been there for a really long time. It's had enough time to accumulate any positive things that might happen. But if you go and look up, you could just switch over to AI mode and you say, "What are the best St. Louis SEO consultants right now?" Take that exact match domain, you know, query, that site won't even show up. it will not even show up in that response. Now, why is that? Because when you go in AI mode, it uses the Google business profiles as the core source of retrieval. So, if it was just, hey, just rank and everything will be fine. But that's like one really small example, but I've seen this repeated across so many industries where people are doing well in Google, but they're invisible in chat GPT. That happens a lot or invisible in clawed or whatever else. So, it's not the same. And they're using different signals. using different products to make those those uh recommendations, right? And so I that's why I'm saying it's like you got to figure out that other 20%. It's really really important. And the good news is it's not that complicated once you really recently as I've gone deeper into this, the more I've realized that like it's like when a magician reveals its tricks. And >> but you got there essentially because you've locked yourself home, got into the hole and like you know tinkered about. So you can say once you've come out from the other side that like I see the light, it all makes sense cuz I've had time to spend and demystify everything. But for a lot of SEOs out there and marketers, we're also sort of just t taking what's on LinkedIn, right? Taking in the discussions, taking in the TLDDRS and like one day it's GEO in terms of like what do we name the change that's going on and then there's also, you know, a lot of controversy on like hey let's there's too much confusion going on on what works and what doesn't. So let's actually just stick with our traditional SEO practices and that will help us in the long run because this is what you can use to kind of explain to you know your stakeholders, shareholders, I mean your yeah your stakeholders actually your companies that you're working for like you know where to spend the money. So I I I assume what you're trying to say is, you know, you do kind of have to get your hands dirty and understand it in order to come out the other side and know how to uh maximize that 20% and know that it's important instead of just sort of taking people's word for it. >> Correct. Yes. I I don't believe the best way to learn this is from headline reading. No, I do not believe that's the way to do it. And to be honest, like I kind of live I like I kind of live isolated from all content like that. My LinkedIn ex any social media platforms I use a blocker so I don't see any feeds. So like I feel bad sometimes people like they'll like at me on a piece of content I don't even know like I I don't know what's happening. Like my I have my um one of my team members goes and reviews all my content and like engages with stuff. I'm not even there. Like I because I can't I can't be there. I need to be here. I need to be doing the work. I need to be figuring this stuff out. I don't like I feel maximum urgency when it comes to this. I'm I'm like it's moving so fast and I'm in it. I'm in it. I'm every day I'm using this stuff. I'm learning. I'm thinking about this all day and it's still moving fast for me. I couldn't imagine someone that spends half of their day on LinkedIn reading and consuming so many different ideas but never taking out their hammer and trying to build a house. I just it just to me seems like a massive waste of time. That's why I don't I don't spend any time on social media. To each their own to >> you add the information you're still present though. The difference is you're still present but then you're not consuming. >> Correct. I only create. I do not consume. I just I cannot bring myself to do it. I just can't. Because as soon as you start doing that, you're starting to focus on other people. You're starting to focus on what he said or what she said or what they said or and then your mind gets so warped that you don't know what you know anything basically because the only way you learn is from actually doing the work. And unfortunately, there's no shortcut. And like I've spent I've had some really long nights like my wife's like, "Okay, let's shut the computer down. let's, you know, let's watch a movie. Like it because it's just to me like I I just I can't see this opportunity and just like not want to go all in. I think it is that important. I think the people that do take it seriously, I'm not just talking about doing AI SEO. That's just one part of it. I'm talking just the AI technology as a whole, like this is like I I was too young to experience the internet boom, obviously, but this is this is my version of the internet boom. And it will likely also crash like the internet boom. That's going to happen undoubtedly. Like we are in a bubble. Like when I see an AI tracking tool that gets like $7 million of funding and it like does like like very basic things, I'm like uh-oh, that's not good. So, you know, and that, you know, that's a form formulation of a bubble, but I don't think it takes away from what what's happening. And so anyway, yeah, just totally my opinion, but I just think if you're serious about, you know, building a business or building a career in this industry or just in this current environment, like do the work. >> Yeah, you you you got it. You definitely have to. >> And very last thing cuz I just just wanted to know. So the content that you do then produce, it's basically you're creating it in isolation from the noise. It's correct. >> Whatever you're sharing, it's safe to assume you're not because one of my questions would be like, how do you not stay overwhelmed? How do you you know with all the the changes that are happening and like you know everyone's reporting you know their own experiments and their results of what's ch like what they think is influencing the LLMs and as an SEO and as a a content marketer as a digital marketer as a marketer in in general or any business owner you want to sort of keep up with what's going on right to stay relevant and sort of like see what changes you need to make. A lot of people look up to you as well for your content but it's good to know that you're sort of like creating it in your bubble within your own safe bubble. Correct. And I mean, um, if something if a if there's a big study out there that's very, you know, very prominent and maybe disproves something or proves something else, like I'll probably hear about it in one way or another, right? But I have always found, this is just for me personally, that when I have my own data and I learn from my own experiences and my own data, that that's more than enough to figure out what works. And the times that I've been the most confused in anything, whether it's SEO or Facebook ads or YouTube or whatever, insert any channel, is always when I'm under deep consumption behavior. I'm consuming and I'm consuming and I'm just just stuff coming in and then like what comes out of it, right? You think about like, okay, well now I now have know 17 different strategies as to do this one thing. And like at the end of the day, like YouTube, like I've been on YouTube since 2017. Like it's not that complicated. You you pick a topic, you give value, you turn your camera on, and then you create a thumbnail, and you publish, and you do that consistently a lot. And people just want things to be more complicated than they are. They want they want to try to find some sort of hack or something. But I just think doing the work is the only way to learn. I I truly believe that. And you can consume. I mean, it is kind of ironic me saying this like don't consume when I create content that people consume, right? That's very contradictory, but I would much rather have someone turn off their social media like completely and go and experiment and learn that way than to read one of my stupid LinkedIn posts. Way more impactful for their life than to just read my clickbait, right? So, you know, when I do create, it is a situation I of course I know how to do copyright. I know how to play the game. Okay? So when I p when I write, I know how to get people to engage with my stuff. That's that is a art and science. That is not something that's by accident. I've been I've been writing content for a really long time. I know how to write content and the AI can't do it for me at the way the way that I do it. But you know, I publish and it's almost like the way I describe is like kind of like it's like a grenade. I just publish. It's like a grain. I throw it out there and then I disappear into the into the woods and I don't want to see what happened when it when that goes off and that's just the nature. That's how I do it. Not saying it's for everyone. I'm just saying that's how I do it. >> And so but you were saying like in terms of you have created a lot of content using AI, right? But you're saying that AI can't recreate how you write, you know, for the audience or the clickbait. So is this are these like psychology bits in your in your article that you infuse structure? What what can't AI recreate? What is the the day Nathan Gotch touch in articles and making them? >> Yeah. I mean I would say so like anything that's on social media on my ex or LinkedIn even YouTube actually is all me. I never use AI on anything like that. I use AI on the companybased plat like the websites and stuff like that. I would use AI. But when it comes to my personal brand and and um you know that type of content, it's always me. Now, as far as what what I can do that's different than AI, the reason why AI cannot compete with me personally is because it's not me. It's very simple. It's not me. And when I write something, it's me. And you can try to go into AI say write like Nathan Gotch or write like Frank Ker or Yeah. Okay. you're not going to be able to do it because the problem is I can pull anecdotal things out of my mind that yeah, you could technically go to notebook LM and load up your anecdotal examples and try. It's just not the same because I try to write like when I write, I write like I speak and it's intentionally erratic. I want it to be erratic. I do weird things in my copy. Like it's it's all by design. It's not an accident. Like I do things that are weird. Like I just >> controversial as well. slightly contradictory at times. >> It's not how someone would have a a natural human conversation. So, it makes sense. You are a real person with personality. >> I'm imperfect. I'm not a perfect robot that has perfect grammar and spelling all the time. And you know, like that's what the AI does. The AI is immaculate. It does not make mistakes, does not make grammar errors, does not make spelling errors. It's like perfect all the And is this something you intentionally done before AI? Like or when you noticed maybe starting to use Jasper and how powerful it was, did you then start to like really lean into creating not to say imperfect content, but more personal content to that's in your voice and double down on that? >> No, imperfect is actually the perfect word. That's exactly what I do. I think when I look when I reread my content, I think about like, okay, how do I make this sound not like an AI even more? Like, so I'll write my initial. I'll be like, "Okay, sound. Could that be AI? Maybe, maybe not." So, then I then I do my edits cuz like they say the magic's in the edit. So, I think about that and like I this is I'm not I didn't invent any of this by the way. Like this only comes from me studying a lot of copywriters. So, like Frank Kern is one of my like copywriting mentors that you know I've never met, right? And like I've I've spent an ungodly amount of hours studying his copy. He's so good at copywriting. Like I know like as a small example like if I join one of his webinars or something I will know that he's going to try to sell me something. I know as soon as I get that watch he's going to try to sell me something. I know it's going to happen and by the end of the webinar like I'll tell I'm not going to buy anything. I know he's going to try to sell something. By the end of the webinar I'm like pulling my credit card out and I'm like about to buy something and I'm like how did that just happen? How did I just go from like saying I wasn't going to buy something to all of a sudden I'm like about to buy his stuff? How did he do that to me? And I think I I think a lot about that. So, um, and so I I've studied his copy. Uh, one of my favorite books is Cash Fertising. So, it's like hands down one of my favorite books. It's like my most marked up book. I've got a bunch of books back there. It's but it's easily one of my most marked up books. One of the books I I read probably revisit at least on a weekly basis. I mean, it's so so good. But it's small things. Like, one of the things I learned in my copyrightiting practice was just like intentional grammar errors, intentional spelling mistakes. It's a weird I know it sounds really odd but it of course it doesn't make sense but when people see it they're like oh hey you missed a period and what happens like this is really diabolical but like the best copywriters they will make mistakes because they know it drives engagement it's just it these are small tricks but they do work um and then the other small things like I just will use a lot of anecdotes things that people can't replicate so um so yeah and controversy like I'm not that controversial like Yeah. Controversial in the context of like >> no controversy. >> Yeah. Yeah. Like and it's it's usually because the thing is like what's so silly about social media is like the people that might disagree with me on social media like if we had a conversation we'd be burial, right? Because the problem with social media content and this is just the nature of it like uh we'll say X and LinkedIn in particular. It's short form. There's no room for context. There's no room for explanation. It's just kind of silly, right? And you know, I don't I don't get into get into it with people. I'm not that guy who's going to like debate someone on a social media thread. So, but yeah, I I do intentionally like to to get engagement. I am going to use every tool my disposal. And >> you have a strong It makes sense. You have a strong copyrightiting background, a strong writing background. Um, a lot of your initial content that has brought you that has propelled you to like uh, you know, to where you are today is because of writing great copy, having great content on YouTube as well, you know. So, it it makes a lot of sense and this is now benefiting you as well in the AI era. Like you're sort of >> I suppose you're still in the exercise now as well. >> Yeah. >> And you've already created this personality that you can like go on to chat GPT and say right in nature got voice you know you achieve that status. So that's great. So now you can be like all afair about it because you've like you've >> Well, I don't know about that, but I mean I've just I've just written a lot of words and I I I mean I've literally the amount of words I've written since I started this is just unreal. I mean I've just written so much and it's pretty shocking like the more you do something you get a little bit better at it. It's like for example I used when I started my agency I used to avoid sales calls as much as possible. Like I was like I I'll send you a proposal via email, right? Like I try to avoid the phone and it wasn't >> writing. >> No, no, just like in general just like certain skill sets that you'll avoid doing uh because you push out, you know, push yourself outside your comfort zone. So I would like avoid doing sales calls. But it wasn't until I started actually saying, you know what, I'm going to talk to people on the phone. I'm going to talk to them on the phone, do a discovery call. I'm going to go through that process. And I've done that. I've lost count of the amount of sales calls I've done at this point. And now, shockingly, I'm pretty decent at sales, right? So it's like these skills, there's no secrets. YouTube's the same thing. Go and watch I I intentionally leave my first video on YouTube that I ever did cuz it's so painfully cringe when I watch it. I'm like I can't. It's so hard to watch. It's just painful. But I keep it there because I want to see that I've grown and I want to see that progress over time. And I'm not some good person on video, but I'm just saying I'm better than what I was objectively. My videos have definitely gotten better from that point. And I think, you know, I wish there could be a shortcut. I really do. I I people every single day ask me, "How do you get how do I get leads for my business?" And like, "Oh, should I start a YouTube channel?" And I'm like, "Yes, >> why not try it?" >> Yeah. Like I I don't know the answer to what's going to work in your unique situation, but YouTube worked for me and people want to know like the secrets to all these things, but they're really is not a huge secret. Like, you shouldn't even be thinking about tactics or optimization until you've published a hundred videos. And then once you've done that, then you can start thinking about okay, how do I, you know, how do I use some tactics, some optimization, some like, you know, things. But if you haven't even done like the basic things, there's no point of getting into the weeds. So yeah. So anyway, >> that we'll leave it at that. Continue to experiment and never give up. >> Yeah. Oops. >> This is great, Nathan. Thank you so much. I know we went over time, but thank you for being so gracious and like [music] >> entertaining all my questions. >> Like I like that you pushed me. I like that you pushed me on some of those questions.